chore(blog): announcing the work on AsyncAPI spec 3.0 release (#611)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/async-api-spec-3.0-release.md

---
title: "AsyncAPI Spec 3.0 is coming!"
date: 2022-02-28T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - Specification
  - Announcement
  - Release
cover: /img/posts/async-api-spec3.0-release/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Harsh Mishra
    photo: /img/avatars/harsh.webp
    link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/harshcasper/

> excerpt: 'Announcing the start of work on AsyncAPI Spec 3.0. Checkout all the major new features coming to AsyncAPI and how you can get involved!'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: 'Announcing the start of work on AsyncAPI Spec 3.0. Check out all the potential new features coming to AsyncAPI 3.0 and how you can get involved!'
```
It is more potential new features than actual features, at least for now. Not sure if we want to make that distingshion?

featured: false
---

> AsyncAPI is a specification for describing your event-driven architecture and our specification allows you to describe and document your message-driven APIs into a human-readable format. After the last v2.3.0 release, the AsyncAPI community is inching towards a 3.0 release that will bring together multiple features, enhancements and breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: > After the last v2.3.0 release, the AsyncAPI community is inching towards a 3.0 release that will bring together multiple features, enhancements and breaking changes.

this sentence sounds to me like after 2.3 there will be no 2.4. Please write it in the way that we will continue releasing spec as described in [release cadence](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/RELEASE_PROCESS.md#release-cadence) and will work on 3.0 on a side

> AsyncAPI is a specification for describing your event-driven architecture and our specification allows you to describe and document your message-driven APIs into a human-readable format. AsyncAPI community is currently inching towards a 3.0 release that will bring together multiple features, enhancements and breaking changes. We follow [release cadence](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/RELEASE_PROCESS.md#release-cadence) and we will continue to release the Spec to the community as we continue to build on it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AsyncAPI is a specification for describing your event-driven architecture. Our specification allows you to describe and document your message-driven APIs into a human-readable format. The AsyncAPI community is currently inching towards a 3.0 release that will bring together multiple features, enhancements, and breaking changes. We follow [release cadence](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/RELEASE_PROCESS.md#release-cadence) and we will continue to release the Spec to the community as we continue to build on it.
```

> ## Major new features
> 
> Many new features for AsyncAPI Spec 3.0 are being planned and written. Among the new major new features and changes so far:

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
## Potential Changes

Many new features for AsyncAPI Spec 3.0 are being planned, written, and discussed. Among them are:
```

-   [Introduce Schema Versioning](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/697)
-   [Introducing Data Format bindings](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/694)
-   [Making servers aware of their service name](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/654)
-   [Solving publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618) 

> -   [Defining an AsyncAPI file](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/628) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [What does an AsyncAPI file mean](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/628) 
```

-   [Fixing schema inconsistencies](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/583)
-   [Defining a schema format other than the default one](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/622)
-   [Remove `$ref` field from `Channel Item Object`](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/699) 
-   [Application of message traits (intentionally) replacing existing attributes](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/505)
-   [Address perspective and channel reuse issues through introducing 'endpoint' concept](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/599)

The tooling issues and pull requests which are tied up with the Spec 3.0 release are:

-   [Implement intent-driven Parser API](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/401)
-   [Splitting out definitions into separate files](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/issues/127)
-   [Move binding JSON schema files to main JSON schema repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/issues/113)

> We are using the [GitHub milestone](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/milestone/18) to track down all the issues related to Spec 3.0 release. If you are willing to take up an issue, filter the issues with `needs champion` label and drive the initiative forward. We also have a [release journal](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/163) for the upcoming Spec 3.0 release to keep note of all the references, build the right documentation, and track the progress for the upcoming release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are using [this GitHub milestone](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/milestone/18) to track down all the issues related to Spec 3.0 release. If you are willing to take up an issue, filter the issues with `needs champion` label and drive the initiative forward. We also have a [release journal](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/163) for the upcoming Spec 3.0 release to keep note of all the references, build the right documentation, and track the progress for the upcoming release.
```

## Contributing to the release

> AsyncAPI is a community-driven project and we welcome all kinds of contributions! To get started, join our Slack workspace by [requesting an invite](http://asyncapi.com/slack-invite). After joining, reach out to us on the `#03_specification` channel and participate in the conversations.

Reviewer 2: Please change sentence about https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite a bit as it kinda suggests you need to request invite while this link is like self-inviting, no request process. Just write `join slack` I guess

To better understand AsyncAPI and how the Spec 3.0 release will play out, we recommend watching our [past meeting recordings](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CLNgLB4-UnA&list=PLbi1gRlP7pihClJY-kXuTRRJ8n1awb0VV). To know how you can contribute, we recommend checking out our [contributing guidelines](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md). If you wish to keep track of all the work that is happening on the Spec 3.0 release, we recommend checking out our [GitHub issue](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/691).

> Before landing in your contributions, make sure you follow our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and the pull request you raised is [described properly](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#conventional-commits). To know how we collaborate using Git & GitHub, follow the [Git workflow](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/git-workflow.md) that we have developed for new contributors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before landing in your contributions, make sure you follow our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and the pull request you raised is [described properly](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#conventional-commits). To know how we collaborate using Git & GitHub, follow the [Git workflow](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/git-workflow.md) that we have developed for contributors.
```

## When will the release happen?

> We are yet to arrive at a date but the community is working towards releasing this by the end of 2022. Currently, we meet every two weeks to discuss the upcoming Spec 3.0 release and share updates and you are welcome to join it!

Reviewer 2: please add paragraph about upcomming meeting https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/270
maybe we will manage to merge it before 

also add link to AsyncAPI calendar https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=tbrbfq4de5bcngt8okvev4lstk@group.calendar.google.com

Reviewer: Might need to push that for the next meeting, unless you are super quick @HarshCasper 😄

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47351025/156368308-e5b5e1b8-54cf-402b-a75b-205120bf09f7.png)

> We are yet to arrive at a date but the community is working towards releasing this by the end of 2022. Currently, we meet every two weeks to discuss the upcoming Spec 3.0 release and share updates and you are welcome to join it! We are going to have our next meeting on [UTC 16:00 on March 3, 2022](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/270). You can access the [AsyncAPI Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=tbrbfq4de5bcngt8okvev4lstk@group.calendar.google.com) and explore our upcoming meetings.

Reviewer: I guess we have to link the next meeting here, @derberg do you mind pinging us when the new issue is up?

Reviewer 2: @jonaslagoni actually you can create it as you have proper rights in repo. Just go to https://github.com/asyncapi/community/actions/workflows/create-event-issue.yml an click Run workflow button

but first you need to update l with zoom and streaming info. It proved to be good, so we can make it official there. For now I was creating issue and editing it manually

Reviewer: @HarshCasper there you go: https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/282

> The release would follow a three-step process: End of the review period, Beta testing and official announcement. Currently, we are working in a review period where important work is picked before we start working on them. During Beta testing, we invite external contributors and users to test the contributions that have landed in and validate their use cases. Finally, after rigorous testing, we will make an official announcement about our release!

Reviewer: We don't really have any beta testing, do we? 🤔 

What exactly are you referring to here? 🙂

Author: I took some inspiration from this blog: https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/v2-important-dates#:~:text=the%20next%20version.-,Beta%20testing%20program%20(July%2DSeptember),-Right%20after%20we%27re

Let me know if that's not the norm right now and I will remove this portion 😄

Reviewer: As we don't have any official way of doing this yet, maybe this makes more sense?
```suggestion
The release will happen gradually, where the new specification and tooling will live in coexistence until there is a collective consensus that everything is ready. This gives everyone an easy way to test out the new changes and provide feedback before the release. Finally, after rigorous testing, we will make an official announcement about our release!
```

Reviewer: @derberg what do you think about this change? 🤔

Reviewer 2: not sure what that means 😅 you mean release candidates?

Reviewer: Yes 🙂

Reviewer 2: Then I definitely recommend rewording it that we will provide release candidates and not `The release will happen gradually` smiley. You can add that we will provide release candidates as we do already with regular releases + generator, and if needed more tools too

Reviewer: That makes sense 👍 @HarshCasper can you adapt the sentenance? 🙂
